adding CONTRIBUTING.md and CONTRIBUTORS.md (#157)
VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing

FV3core is actively developed by Vulcan, so please contact us if there is interest in making contributions in the near-term.
Contributors names will be added to [AUTHORS.rst](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/AUTHORS.rst).

> 

Author: The README does start with a 'Getting Started' section, not sure how much should be different for a Quickstart?

> 

Author: I added something, not sure if it's what you had in mind?

> 

Reviewer: I think it's a great start, and good enough to merge. I'd like to modify it in another PR afterwards. It would be good for it to describe commands needed to install pre-commit and its dependencies, and I have some ideas to make it more terse.

> 

Author: I guess it's a matter of whether it's a quickstart for developers or users of the code. currently developers make the most sense because we don't have users, though generally I think of a Quickstart as being a quick way for someone to run the code, and developers should spend the time to read more...

> 

Reviewer: I'd be fine with putting it in CONTRIBUTING instead, if that's more appropriate.

Given the amount of content in the readme, I hope the Quickstart can make 100% sure that people developing the code at least can run the tests (linting and pytest), even if they decide not to read the rest of the document. Of course they should read more, but at least this core functionality should be easy to find and reference.

We're only close to having a supported way for a "user" to run the code, the mini-app is still being written.

## Style

The first version of the dycore was written with minimal metadata and typing, motivated primarily by matching the regression data produced by the Fortran version of the code using the numpy backend.
We are now actively refactoring, moving code that still does computations in Python into GT4py stencils and merging stencils together with the introduction of enabling features in GT4py (such as regions).
While we do that, clarifying the operation of the model and what the variables are will both help make the model easier to read and reduce errors as we move around long lists of argument variables.

Specifically, we want to start adding the following where appropriate:
- Type hints on Python functions (see [`utils/typing.py`](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/utils/typing.py) and below)
- More descriptive types on stencil definitions
- Docstrings on outward facing Python functions: describe what methods are doing, describe the intent (*in*, *out*, or *inout*) of the function arguments

### Docstrings

> These should aid us in refactoring and understanding what a function is doing. If it is not completely understood yet what is happening, what is known can be written along with a `TODOC` to indicate it is incomplete.

Reviewer: I prefer TODO personally but either is fine.

For example:

```python
def stencil(...):
    """This is a short description that fits on one line.

    Here is a longer explanation of the assumptions and why this exists.

    TODOC: I do not fully understand why ke_c needs to be updated here.

    Args:
        uc: x-velocity on C-grid (inout)
        vc: y-velocity on C-grid (inout)
        vort_c: Vorticity on C-grid (inout)
        ke_c: kinetic energy on C-grid (inout)
        v: y-velocity on D-grid (inout)
        u: x-velocity on D-grid (inout)
        dt2: timestep (in)

    """
```

### Python functions
These should mostly be lightweight workflow wrappers calling gt4py stencils, though currently exceptions exist where Python code does computations on data fields.

> Original convention is:
> ```python
> def compute(var1, var2, var3, param1, param2, param3):
> ```
> 
> Order of arguments does not actually matter, but generally follows the convention of listing 3d fields first, followed by parameters, as is required by gt4py stencil functions.
> 
> New convention: make use of `fv3core/utils/typing.py` to specify fields, also type-hint any function
> outputs.
> 
> For example:
> ```python
> def compute(var1: FloatField, var2:IntField, var3: BoolField,
>             param1: float_type, param2: int_type, param3: bool_type):
> ```

Reviewer: Because of how github messages/formatting work, I had to put backslashes before the code blocks - please remove them from my suggestion if/when you merge it.

```suggestion
New code should be type hinted making use of `fv3core/utils/typing.py` when typing gt4py fields. You may run into code in fv3core before we added this convention. An older code like:
\```python
def compute(var1, var2, var3, param1, param2, param3):
\```

would become:

\```python
def compute(var1: FloatField, var2:IntField, var3: BoolField,
            param1: float_type, param2: int_type, param3: bool_type):
\```
There is no determined convention for order of arguments, but the code generally follows the convention of listing 3d fields first followed by parameters, as is required by gt4py stencil functions.
```

Reviewer: Suggestion still outstanding.

Another example
```python
def make_storage_from_shape(shape, origin, dtype, init=True):
```

Turns into
```python
    def make_storage_from_shape(
        shape: Tuple[int, int, int],
        origin: Tuple[int, int, int],
        *,
        dtype: DTypes = np.float64,
        init: bool = True,
    ) -> Field:
```

- We will prioritize adding typing to methods that are used by other modules.
  Not every internal method needs this level of specification.
- Internal functions that are likely to be inlined into a larger stencil do not need this if it will just be removed in the near-term.

### GT4Py stencils

> FV3core defines a custom decorator `fv3core.gtstencil` defined in `decorators.py` that it uses to define stencils.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FV3core defines a custom decorator `fv3core.gtstencil` defined in `decorators.py` for creating stencils.
```

This eventually calls `gt4py.gtscript.stencil`, but sets default external arguments such as `backend`, and `rebuild` and provides the global namelist to the stencils as `namelist`.
The type of each input of a stencil requires a type and the first version of the model used a shorthand 'sd' (storage data) to indicate a 3D gt4py storage, such as

```python
@gtstencil()
def pt_adjust(pkz:sd, dp1: sd, q_con: sd, pt: sd):
    with computation(PARALLEL), interval(...):
```

> Note that `fv3core.gtstencil` can be manually called on an undecorated stencil, but this is currently in general discouraged except when used internally.
> 
> In the refactoring of the dycore, we are using lower dimensional storages and different item types, so `sd` is insufficient to type these.

Reviewer: I would suggest removing this guideline, since contributed code would be by definition internal code.

```suggestion
In the refactoring of the dycore, we are using lower dimensional storages and different item types, so `sd` is insufficient to type these.
```

Author: I think it's meant to call out that there are two ways to call stencils, using the explicit decorator @, or creating the decorated stencil inline. These two styles can be confusing to keep track of.

[`utils/typing.py`](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/fv3core/utils/typing.py) defines various field types.
For example, `FloatField[IJ]` for a 2D field of default floating point values.

### Namelist

> The `fv3core.gtstencil` decorator automatically makes `namelist` available, if `from __externals__ import namelist` is added at the top of the stencil or any stencil function.

Reviewer: Is it specifically only the first line of the stencil code where this can be added, and without any other imports? If yes, please emphasize this. If no, please add a code usage example showing it working in a more relaxed context, such as:
```python
@fv3core.gtstencil
def mystencil():
    from gtscript import parallel
    from __externals__ import namelist, x_start
```

### Assertions

> We can now include assertions of compile time variables inside of gtscript functions with the syntax: `assert __INLINED(namelist.grid_type < 3)`.

Reviewer: Is it that it can be only of the form `assert __INLINED(<expression>)`, or is it a different rule like a general `assert <expression>`? Please add the rule for the syntax here.

Author: I am not sure on that, @jdahm?

Reviewer 2: `assert` is a keyword in GT4Py, but we are not mapping assertions into the generated code. They can only be compile-time for now, so @rheacangeo is correct, you need the `__INLINED()` for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now include assertions of compile time variables inside of gtscript functions with the syntax `assert __INLINED(<expression>)`, for example `assert __INLINED(namelist.grid_type < 3)`.
```

### State
Some outer functions include a 'state' object that is a SimpleNamespace of variables and a `comm` object that is the `CubedSphereCommunicator` object enabling halo updates.
The `state` include pointers to gt4py storages for all variables used in the method.
For fields that experience a halo update, the state includes pointers to Quantity objects named `<storage variable name>_quantity`, which is a lightweight wrapper around the storage.
This enables using gt4py storages in stencils and quantities for halo updates, using the same memory space.
A future refactor will simplify this convention, likely through the use of the decorator and/or a GDP from GT4py that may allow Quantities to be used in stencils.

As we refactor, we may opt to use this convention more (or a similar one to avoid calling functions while relying on getting the order of a long list of variables correct), but should be considered as part of a refactor on a case-by-case basis.

### New styles

> Propose new style ideas to the team (or subset) with examples and description of how data flow would be altered if relevant. Once an idea is accepted, open a PR with the idea applied to a sample if possible (if not, correct the whole model), and update this doc to reflect the new convention we all should incorporate as we refactor.

Reviewer: How should these be proposed, as github issues?

- More descriptive types on stencil definitions
- Docstrings on outward facing Python functions: describe what methods are doing, describe the intent (*in*, *out*, or *inout*) of the function arguments

### Docstrings
These should aid us in refactoring and understanding what a function is doing. If it is not completely understood yet what is happening, please consult other team members and GFDL as appropriate. If we still cannot tell what is happening, you can write what is known along with a `TODOC` to indicate it is incomplete.
For example:

```python
def stencil(...):
    """This is a short description that fits on one line.

    Here is a longer explanation of the assumptions and why this exists.

    TODOC: Why does ke_c need to be updated here?

    Args:
        uc: x-velocity on C-grid (inout)
        vc: y-velocity on C-grid (inout)
        vort_c: Vorticity on C-grid (inout)
        ke_c: kinetic energy on C-grid (inout)
        v: y-velocity on D-grid (inout)
        u: x-velocity on D-grid (inout)
        dt2: timestep (in)

    """
```

> ### Python functions

Reviewer: Completely optional suggestion.
```suggestion
### Type hinting Python functions
```

These should mostly be lightweight workflow wrappers calling gt4py stencils, though currently exceptions exist where Python code does computations on data fields.

Original convention is:
```python
def compute(var1, var2, var3, param1, param2, param3):
```

> Order of arguments does not actually matter, but generally follows the convention of listing 3d fields first, followed by parameters, as is required by gt4py stencil functions.

Reviewer: I first read this (inaccurately) as "gt4py stencils can take their arguments in any order". There might be a more precise way to say it than "order does not actually matter".

Author: ah, but it does matter for stencils, it's python functions that it doesn't. and could definitely be said differently.

# Contributing

FV3core is being actively developed by Vulcan Inc. Please contact us if there is interest
in making contributions. Credit will be given to contributors by adding their names
to the `CONTRIBUTORS.rst` file.

## Linting

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

# Contributing

FV3core is actively developed by Vulcan, so please contact us if there is interest in making contributions in the near-term.

> Contributors names will be added to [AUTHORS.rst](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/AUTHORS.rst).

Author: CONTRIBUTING.md

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contributors names will be added to [`CONTRIBUTORS.md`](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/AUTHORS.rst).
```

to the `CONTRIBUTORS.rst` file.

FV3core is actively developed by Vulcan, so please contact us if there is interest in making contributions in the near-term.
Contributors names will be added to [AUTHORS.rst](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/AUTHORS.rst).

## Linting

> The linter may change over time, but you should always be able to correct your code (if you have pip installed requirements_lint.txt locally) using `make lint`, or to correct all files, including those not yet in version control `make lint_all`

Author: what is wrong with this sentence? this makes it clear that the linting requirements may change

Reviewer 2: Literally anything can change in code, and as we know it is in fact always evolving. This document should describe the current state of the code and it is implied that change can happen.

```

We manage the list of syntax requirements using [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/).
**This runs all checks and is required to pass as one of the continuous integration tests.**

The list of checkes includes `black`, `isort`, and `flake8`, among a few others.

> Black is configured in `pyproject.toml`, and the others use `setup.cfg`.

Reviewer 2: Yes, this is the fault of the flake8 developer. He refuses to use `pyproject.toml`...

    - Must ignore because gt4py stencils return outputs in place (no return statement)
    - Can avoid if all stencil assignments use square brackets on the left
        - `out[0, 0, 0]` or `out[idx]/out[curr]/out[something]`

Flake8 rules not listed will be enforced unless we find a need not to enforce them.
Since documentation does go out of date, please consult the entry in `setup.cfg` for the most up-to-date requirements and update this document if you notice a difference.

## Style

The first version of the dycore was written with minimal metadata and typing, motivated primarily by matching the regression data produced by the Fortran version of the code using the numpy backend.
We are now actively refactoring, moving code that still does computations in Python into GT4py stencils and merging stencils together with the introduction of enabling features in GT4py (such as regions).
While we do that, clarifying the operation of the model and what the variables are will both help make the model easier to read and reduce errors as we move around long lists of argument variables.

Specifically, we want to start adding the following where appropriate:

> - Type hints on Python functions (see [`utils/typing.py`](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/utils/typing.py) and below)

Author: this address is incorrect. https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/fv3core/utils/typing.py

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Type hints on Python functions (see [`utils/typing.py`](https://github.com/VulcanClimateModeling/fv3core/blob/master/fv3core/utils/typing.py) and below)
```

- More descriptive types on stencil definitions
- Docstrings on outward facing Python functions: describe what methods are doing, describe the intent (*in*, *out*, or *inout*) of the function arguments

### Docstrings

> These should aid us in refactoring and understanding what a function is doing. If it is not completely understood yet what is happening, what is known can be written along with a `TODOC` to indicate it is incomplete.

Author: TODOC? is this a typo?

Reviewer 2: I was trying to make it different from TODO, so that it can be easily searched for in the code. Do you agree or should it just be a TODO?
